Pathway: Immune inhibitory checkpoints (Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated Antigen 4)

Papers: Wolchock et al. The Oncologist (2008)
 Byun et al. Nature Reviews Endocrinology (2017)
Description of pathway:
Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated Antigen 4 (CTLA 4) is an immune checkpoint receptor expressed on
the surface of T-lymphocytes. Normally, CTLA4 ensures that the immune system does not harm the host
when reacting to a foreign antigen. When CTLA4 is present, it binds with high affinity to the B7 co-
stimulatory ligand to which CD28 protein present on the T cell surface binds to. This prevents T
cells from continuous immune response. Based on this immune suppression pathway, cancer cells
developed ways to limit the host's immune response. A way to upregulate the T cell activity is to
use monoclonal antibodies that bind to CTLA4, thus preventing them from binding to B7 ligand.
Clinical data shows that blocking CTLA4 results in increased expression of CD4+ and CD8+ effector
cells, which coorelates with increased anti-tumor immunity.
Pathway genes: 
	Gene      GTEX Median         TCGA N Median       Observed    
	CTLA4     0.34                6.98                0.00        
Status: Patient has lower CTLA4 expression inconsistent with good anti-CTLA4 immunotherapy response.


Pathway: Tumor-Infiltrating Lymphocytes

Papers: Iglesia et al. Clinical Cancer Research (2014)
 Bai et al. Scientific Reports (2015)
Description of pathway:
Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) are white blood cells that have migrated into a tumor.
Usually, patients with high concentration of TILs are associated with a better prognosis in various
types of cancers. For example, for breast cancer studies have shown that presence of T regulatory
cells as well as CD4/CD8 correlate with tumor grade, stage, and overall patient survival. CD8+ T
cells, aka cytotoxic T lymphocytes are an important factor of immune defense and tumor surveillance
since they activate major mechanisms for malignant cells destruction. Massive infiltration of CD8+
cells for many types of cancers correlate with a better prognosis.
Pathway genes: 
	Gene      GTEX Median         TCGA N Median       Observed    
	CD8       0.75                65.80               0.00        
	BCR       28.53               12.50               0.00        
Status: Patient has lower expression levels of CD8+ and BCR, which are inconsistent with good responders.


